Downing Street for today's coronavirus
press conference I'm joined by chief
medical officer Chris Witte Chris it's
good to have you back and also by deputy
chief scientific adviser Angela McLain
and before Angela gives us an update on
the data I'd like to update you on the
steps that the government is taking to
defeat the corona virus our step-by-step
action plan is aimed at slowing the
spread of the virus so fewer people need
hospital treatment at any one time and
that will protect the NHS is ability to
cope at each point we've been following
scientific and medical advice and we've
been very deliberate in our actions
taking the right measures at the right
moment we're taking unprecedented action
to increase the NHS's capacity by
dramatically expanding the numbers of
beds key staff and equipment on the
front line to give people the care they
need when they need it most
that's also why we're instructing people
to stay at home so that we protect our
NHS and save lives I can report that
through the government's ongoing
monitoring and testing program as of
today 208 thousand eight hundred and
thirty-seven people had now been tested
for the virus fifty-one thousand six
hundred and eight have tested positive
the number of people admitted to
hospital with coronavirus symptoms now
stands at seventeen thousand nine
hundred and eleven and of those who have
contracted the virus five thousand three
hundred and seventy three sadly have
died our thoughts our deepest
condolences are with their loved ones at
this very difficult time
these figures are a powerful reminder of
why we need everyone to follow the
government's guidance we must stay home
to protect our NHS and to save lives as
you'll know last night the prime
minister was admitted to hospital for
tests following advice from his doctor
this was a precautionary step because he
continues to have persistent coronavirus
symptoms ten days after first having
tested positive for the virus I can tell
you the PM had a comfortable night
Hospital and he's in good spirits he's
still in hospital under observation he's
been given regular updates on
developments and he continues to lead
the government I can reassure the
British people that the government
remains united in a single overriding
priority which is to defeat the
coronavirus and see this nation through
the challenge ahead in the last week
under the Prime Minister's leadership
the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Michael Gove has explained what we're
doing to boost manufacturing capability
here at home to meet the rising demand
for ventilators and other equipment in
the NHS business secretary Alok Sharma
has been setting out what the government
is doing to support small businesses and
yesterday health secretary Matt Hancock
gave an update on what we're doing to
bolster capacity in the NHS including
increasing the number of critical care
beds the FCO is supporting all of these
operational priorities so we're
deploying the diplomatic network right
around the world to source and buy
ventilators and protective equipment so
that we can reinforce the NHS frontline
here at home at the same time we're
working with other governments and the
airlines to bring home as many stranded
British nationals as we possibly can
prioritizing our most vulnerable
citizens on commercial flights we've
helped over 200,000 UK Nationals come
home from Spain 13,000 from Egypt 8,000
from Indonesia
we've also charted flights from seven
different countries bringing home more
than two thousand British nationals
we've repatriated a further 1,550 from
cruise ships including most recently the
cold princess and the zaandam and for
those travelers who are still stuck
abroad we're doing everything we can to
keep International airports open to keep
commercial flights running and to
charter flights when there are no other
options under the new arrangements that
I announced last week and which have now
been agreed with 14 Airlines
we've allocated 75 million pounds to
support those arrangements we've already
had flights back from countries
including Peru Ghana and Tunisia and
we're fixing further flights from India
South Africa Nepal and the Philippines
which will fly later on this week so I
want to reassure people that every arm
of government is doing everything it
possibly can to defeat the corona virus
and rise to the challenges that it
presents us at home and abroad last
night Her Majesty the Queen reflected on
the national spirit of unity and resolve
that we're seeing in our country as well
as the collective effort we need to
tackle the disease from our heroic
doctors nurses and care workers through
to those Manning the tills at
supermarkets and pharmacies those
driving the lorries and the buses they
are all worthy of our laws they're all
worthy of our admiration and all that
note both the Prime Minister and I would
like to thank all the NHS staff for
their truly heroic work and we urge the
public to continue to follow the
government's advice to stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives and all
that note I'm going to pass over to
Angela for an update on the latest data
thank you if I could start with a first
slide this is about the work that we
have all been doing in order to stay at
home so what you see there is how much
change there's been in how we use
transport and the orange line I think is
the one that shows us across the whole
country
how national rail usage has fallen right
down to below 20 percent of what it was
during February and you can see with
other ways of moving around they are
also much much lower than you would
normally expect at this time of year you
can see that on the 23rd of March so two
weeks ago today they've really really
fell very dramatically the efforts all
of us are making to stay at home and
save lives are working there are look at
the next slide the the growth in the
number of cases in our hospitals is not
as bad as it would have been if we had
not made these efforts so it is working
but the big question is is its is the
virus spread slowing down enough to make
hospital admissions stay plies and then
even fall if I could have the next slide
please so these are people being
admitted to hospital we've covered 19
across different different regions of
Great Britain and what you can see is
that having risen very steadily up until
around about the 1st of April
they're now starting to sow a more
complicated behavior and starting we
hope to slow down but it really is too
soon to see the effects of the big
changes we all made to our lives from
the 23rd March onwards because remember
that's only two weeks ago and it takes
several weeks after you become infected
for you to be but realize that you're
ill enough that you really need to be in
hospital so we're all watching these
numbers very very carefully and we're
very much hoping that what's going to
happen next as they will at least stop
rising next slide please
the final set of numbers to look at
today is that global comparisons of
these very sad deaths from covered and
this is the most lagged data so these
are data that show the the date of
reporting of deaths and there that can
take a very long time after someone's
died and be rather variable how long
that takes in different countries and we
will expect even if the number of people
being admitted to hospitals and ITU
units does start to stabilize sadly we
do expect this number to keep on rising
because of course it takes time after
people have been admitted to hospital
for them either to get better or very
sadly to die and then of course it
further takes time for those deaths to
be reported so I'll stop there and hand
back to Dominic and you thank you very
much
so very happy to take questions Laura
couldn't spoke from the BBC and thanks
very much foreign secretary and
I see on the prime minister if the Prime
Minister is ill enough to need to be in
hospital
how can he be well enough to run the
country at a time of national emergency
wouldn't it be better if he step back
even briefly in order to recover
properly and if I could ask the medics
and you say that the restrictions are
working but too early to tell the
long-term effects but what would you
review on what a likely exit strategy
from the restrictions being thanks Laura
well first of all long the PM he was
admitted to hospital for tests as a
precaution only and that was because
some of the symptoms that he had when he
first tested positive had persisted he's
had a comfortable night in some Thomas's
he's in good spirits and he's being
readily updated and he still remains in
charge of the government and we're
getting on with all of the various
strands of work to make sure at home and
abroad we can defeat the virus and pull
the country through coronavirus and the
challenges that undoubtedly we're facing
at the moment and you want to comment on
the it's been very straight forward that
we need a good long time series of data
on all of these stages of infection in
order to be able to tell what the impact
or the measures that came in on the 23rd
of March are gonna be we it's too early
to tell yet when we need we need people
to carry on following those instructions
so that we can work out three weeks
later what actually happens in hospitals
or is that give you the answers you need
is it do you want to come back I just
wonder there is increasing discussion
about what the exit strategy from these
restrictions should be I would be
interested to hear Angelo or professor
which is view on what they might
anticipate it given all the
uncertainties around suggestion has been
completely clear we need to know how
well the current the current
restrictions are working before we can
say anything sensible about what the
next stage might be one priority Laura
right now is to stop the spread and
make sure that we can get past the peak
and I think that's the overriding focus
of the government right now and the
other decisions can be considered in
light of the evidence that we're taking
from Angela and Chris in due course
Beth Rigby from Sky thank you our
foreign secretary one of your team
Africa Minister James Doddridge today
urged the prime minister to rest up and
let others do the heavy lifting until he
gets better do you not agree that the
Prime Minister at this moment needs to
rest not work and a question to
Professor which he first thought welcome
back it's nice to see you back we're
entering the third week of lockdown the
government said it would review the
lockdown at the end of this week given
we're now approaching the peak of the
epidemic will you be advised in
ministers to keep these measures in
place and can you give the British
people a sense of whether this will
continue for weeks or months thank you
well on your question about the PM look
he's in charge but you're right he'll
continue to take doctor's advice on what
to do next and we have a team which in
the way I described is full-throttle
making sure that his directions and his
instructions are being implemented and
followed through whether it's the
purchase of ventilators through to the
diplomatic effort to read return a UK
nationals who are stranded abroad and
but as ever
we were the Prime Minister will take the
medical advice that he gets from his
doctor Chris and just to add and I'm
basically to say exactly the same thing
that Angela said earlier which is the
key thing is to get to the point where
we are confident we have reached the
peak and this is now beyond the peak and
at that point I think it is possible to
have a serious discussion about all the
things we need to do step by step to
move to the next phase of managing this
but I think to start having that
discussion until we're confident so
that's what we've got to would I think
be a mistake Robert Peston ITV I'm sorry
Beth did you want to come back just to
follow up professor its just to be
clear given that we are approaching the
peak and and it's the end of the week
whereby the government will review what
the to relax
it seems to me you are saying that the
lockdown measures will continue beyond
this end of this week well I think to be
clear we do not think we know for
certain that the peak will be at the end
of this week this was the point that
Angela was making earlier and I think
until we're confident were there that
would be too early to start calling the
point where we can make move to the next
phase of this epidemic
the government's number one priority
it's overriding priority is to get past
the peak and we do that by stopping the
spread which is why those decisions in
those considerations Beth you rightly
refer to we'll have to wait until we're
beyond that point Robert Peston itv
after coming to questions and probably
for the two scientific experts and first
for professor Witte um I think none of
us can really know quite how much burden
it is even ones in the peak of health to
be Prime Minister the normal advise when
somebody's being as ill as the current
prime minister is to to rest in order to
get better
I mean he's not superhuman though some
would argue that he is taking too much
of a risk in the extent to the extent to
which he's still working so as a doctor
professor with you I wonder if you could
comment a bit on that secondly I
completely understand why you are saying
we cannot outline a plan for lifting the
restrictions until we know whether the
current measures are working but equally
the damaged from a prolonged economic
lockdown will be tremendous in the sense
that you know as if the economy we
simply won't be able to generate the
revenues a taxes that fund public
services and the rest so I do think the
British people would want to feel that
the government is working on a workable
strategy and in particular is it
possible to exit the lockdown unless and
until we have a program of mass testing
for the virus and unless and until we
have technological solutions for tracing
people who may have come into contact
with
those who have the virus well I'll let
Chris comment on the technical aspects
but first of all just be clear the Prime
Minister both in terms of going into
some Thomas's yesterday was taking the
advice of doctors so he's followed the
doctor's advice there and in terms of
his recovering in the days ahead we'll
continue to do so and just again on the
exit strategy let's be clear about this
I mean I'll let Chris talk about talk to
the technical points but the risk right
now is if we take our focus off the
strategy which is beginning to work is
that we won't get through the peak as
fast as we need to which is why it's
perfect legitimate to ask the question
but the government's overriding priority
has got to be to keep up the work that
and the commitment that so many people
have made to make sure that we maintain
the social distancing we stop the spread
we protect the NHS as we come through
the peak Chris so my advice to the prime
minister was to take the medical advice
of the excellent NHS dr. Seward lysing
him and I'm sure he'll continue to do
that the only bit of advice I gave an
addition to that was as widely reported
I did advise him to get tested in the
first place because I thought that was
prudent but after that I didn't wish to
muddle my role with him I'm not his
medical practitioner I'm his adviser on
wider issues in terms of the point you
make about you know there must be
planning for next phase of course there
is and it's it's quite complicated there
are a very large number of technical
elements which need to be brought
together testing is one of them but it
also involves for example considering
the likelihood of a variety of different
other technologies including vaccines
including drugs and when they're likely
to be available I think the one thing I
would say at this point is we've got to
remember just from the health point of
view and clearly there are wider social
and economic issues as well that there
are at least four different kinds of
mortality and ill health we need to take
into account over the period of this
epidemic there's the direct effects of
people dying from coronavirus there's
the indirect effects of the NHS if it
were to become overwhelmed and therefore
unable to provide
emergency care for either coronavirus or
other areas and all the activities were
doing at the moment are to make sure
that both of those are minimized but it
is really important also to remember
that there will be effects from the fact
that some healthcare has had to be
postponed to make room for this within
the NHS and of course anything that has
an impact on the socioeconomic status
particularly of people who are more
deprived will have a long-term health
impact as well and we have to in our
exit strategy balance all of these
different elements which to some extent
can be intentioned so I think it's just
important to understand there's going to
be quite a complicated set of trying to
work out how different things fit
together as we move to the next phase of
this epidemic address your questions
roll I'm just being thick I suppose but
I don't really understand why talking
about you know even if it's in the long
term the way we're going to exit it's
somehow distracts from the imperative of
social distancing and I think everybody
accepts social distancing is absolutely
vital but why people hope that there is
a plan to exit what does that in a sense
reduce the urgency for people doing what
they're doing I think the one reach the
to reassurances I can give you that that
work so that we can properly assess the
measures that we introduced is in place
but also that we do not want to confuse
the message right now because we are not
past the peak to get past the peak we
must have people respecting those
guidelines otherwise we undo all the
good work that so many people have
achieved and contributed to through
their forbearance particularly as the
weather gets a bit warmer make
calculations about what we might do next
if we have some reasonable data on how
large the impact of what we've done is
so far and we can really only start to
start to collect that from now because
we're now about two weeks after people
would have got infected on the 23rd of
March or later thanks Angela Victoria
McDonald channel 4 thank you very much
I was wondering how does the number of
patients in ITU beds in London right now
compared with with what she'd been
at the stage and is there any suggestion
that maybe you won't need as many beds
as the at the Excel center at the
Nightingale as you had expected I don't
know I mean there's a very long answer
in a very short answer the very short
answer is our principle aim in both the
a the fantastic response from the
general public in terms of social
distancing and all the things people
have done and not done on that and also
of the NHS staff we've built things up
is to ensure that the gap between the
number of beds available for intensive
care and those that are needed it's
always in a situation we have some room
to spare and if we end up in a situation
where we have more ICU beds at all times
during this epidemic than we absolutely
need deal with with co-ed and other
areas that will be a success that is
something which is critical for our
overall aim so that in a sense is what
we would like to see is some Headroom
between what we need and what we got
available at any given time both decoded
and for other conditions and of course
that's got to take into account V that's
got to take him to account the regional
distribution of the need which is why as
well as NHS Nightingale in London we've
got the other plans to build and
Birmingham Manchester Bristol in
Harrogate did you want to come back well
I just wondered where we are at the
moment if you look at the modelling and
you refer back to some of the slides
you've just shown is is it the case that
ITU is is performing better now than you
had actually expected at this point well
we're not remotely complacent and but
we're doing everything we can to make
sure we've not only got the capacity but
a bit of room for maneuvers chrises as
because Chris as mentioned Tom Newton
Dunne from the Sun for a secretary
thank you very much back onto the prime
minister's condition two factual
questions for you
foreign secretary have you spoken to
Boris Johnson's day either by text or
telephone and have you taken over any of
his security responsibilities or is he
also running out for miserable bedrooms
to the CMO if I may can you explain why
you recommended he going to hospital for
testing and can you possibly have a go
at answering the question the France
actually didn't answer
explaining the contradiction why the
Prime Minister is sick enough to take up
and valuable hospital bed but well
enough to still be running the country
well Tom I'm not going to comment on
security matters but I spoke to the PM
over the weekend I chaired the morning
meeting that he would normally chair
he's been kept abreast of all the
relevant developments and of course in
terms of the balance that you described
and I'll cause that Chris comment that
some things that he will decide based on
the medical advice he's received from
his doctor Chris do you want to yeah I
mean to be clear it was not me who
recommended he went into hospital that's
entirely between him and his excellent
NHS team the only thing I recommended
was that he got tested in the first
point place
I completely agree that this is a
question for discussion between him and
his medical advisors who are outstanding
Tom do you want to come back yeah please
I mean came to the country is in some
doubt over exactly how well the Prime
Minister is mr. Witte can you possibly
explain easy and risk of catching
pneumonia to see happy ammonia or is
there no Chancellor at all I'm
absolutely not going to discuss any
individual patient nor to be clear do I
actually have all the details and nor
should i because this is an issue
between him and his medical advisors I
can give a general answer which is the
majority the clear majority people who
do end up I'm going to hospital although
they end up going into a general bed
they may or may not need oxygen and
other things and they don't need to go
further than that but that is absolutely
not a comment on his personal situation
which would be completely inappropriate
for me to comment on it's just a general
comment on how things tend to progress
in hospital Chris Smyth from The Times
thank you first class professor which is
the government today has conceded that
no antibody tests that here to all
anyone else has developed is yet good
enough for the purposes and scientists
talked about working with companies to
improve the products or not fat because
it isn't needed yeah so can I ask you
about timing and exactly what stage of
the epidemic do you want to be using
a Masshole antibody test and a what
never population-level infection would
this be needed and does that come a
point where if no improvement that can
be made the tests we have now what have
to be good enough I can also ask foreign
secretary you chaired the coronavirus
meeting this morning you're here this
afternoon if the country and the Prime
Minister needs it
do you feel ready to take charge of
government Kristi want to go first on
the antibody test so the the antibody
tests are at their most useful at a
later stage of the epidemic in in
basically at this point in time we would
expect quite a small proportion of the
population it has probably got
antibodies but over time and that
there's two reasons for that there's the
proportion actually infected and then
there's a period of time between someone
getting an infection and antibodies
being routinely available routinely
detectable and it depends which kind of
antibody you're talking about how soon
that is but most of the tests for most
of the labs you've looked at this would
say 21 28 days would be the kind of time
scale you'll be talking about so they
are they do tend to be more effective
later in the system in the epidemic in
terms of the current test we got at the
moment you got to remember this is a new
disease to which we have you know had
absolutely no knowledge at the beginning
of January and inevitably with we're
feeling our way to some extent I am very
confident we will develop antibody tests
whether they be lab based or dipstick
based over the next period I'm very
confident of that
but I you know the fact that we have not
in our first pass in the first things
that people produced got ones which are
highly effective is not particularly
surprising to anybody who understands
how tests developed I would expect those
to continue to improve both on the
potentially on the dipsticks side and
definitely on the lab side which would
be available in due course through the
NHS over time and the more accurate they
are the more useful they're going to be
for us and they will become more
accurate as time goes by so I think the
situation we'll find ourselves in in a
few months and possibly a few weeks will
be considered
really different to what we find
ourselves in at the moment but I think
it made a lot of sense to get started
early on this because this is clearly
something which in the long run is going
to be very important for how we manage
this epidemic and look on the question
to me that the Prime Minister is in
charge he's leading the government and
giving directions as and when required
and of course as you mentioned I chaired
the 9:15 morning meeting the whole team
is focused on delivering those
instructions and so I'm not going to get
into any hypotheticals did you want to
come back on profess what you talked
about baster does that suggest that we
may have to give up on idea of a home
based incident reading test and just go
after system where you have to send
results back to to a lab no it doesn't
it just means that inevitably I mean the
reason that the UK went for quite a lot
of tests of different types to begin
with is to try a variety of different
ones and see which ones work we expect
the technology to improve over time so I
certainly do not think we were giving up
on this at this point but inevitably
it's going to take a while before we get
to the optimal test performance that is
it would be very surprising if first
first out of the gate
we've got to the best outcome that we
could for these kinds of tests Anna from
The Telegraph are you saying that you
have not spoken to the Prime Minister
today and secondly would you consider
that there is an importance to giving
businesses an idea of when of what kind
of exit strategy the government has and
a rough idea of how many how long it
would take and whether it would be say
staggered by region or by type of person
and all these kind of things under
consideration and just a question for
Chris witty in your medical opinion
should individuals who have been
hospitalized with coronavirus continued
to work from their hospital beds Thanks
so I spoke to the p.m. on Saturday was
the last time I spoke to her in person
and in relation to your other questions
so obviously we're very mindful of the
challenges businesses are facing small
businesses all employers
and of course the workforce as well but
the risk is if we start taking our eye
off the ball of tackling the coronavirus
stopping the spread and getting through
the peak we risk delaying the point at
which we could in the future take those
decisions on easing restrictions so it
is really important right now to keep
the overriding focus on maintaining the
discipline that we've had
keeping adherence to the guidelines that
the government has set out and making
sure that we stop the spread of
coronavirus and making a general point
as a doctor patients of mine to be clear
that is definitely not the prime
minister with patients of mine there are
some who are in a hospital bed but a
perfectly capable of managing massively
complicated things from the hospital bed
others clearly are not that is
absolutely a conversation between the
individual and the doctors and nurses
who are looking after them and as you
want to come back on either those points
yeah I mean on the exit strategy we know
that different departments are already
starting to look at what kind of things
can in their fields and I'm feeding back
into number 10 on that wouldn't it help
business confidence to give some sort of
idea of what's on the table well I think
the risk is and it would undermine
business confidence if we took our foot
off the pedal and eased up on the
restrictions right now and as a result
of that we found that we weren't
stopping the spread of the disease as
quickly as we are the wise could and I
think a lot of the business community
will understand that of course all of
the review and the measures to make sure
that we can review the effectiveness of
the measures in the way that Angela's
described all of that work is is going
on Stefan from city I am thank you
foreign secretary downs of small
businesses across the country are
waiting on advice about when the rollout
of the bio subsea scheme will be in
practice can you say today if there will
be wage relief for all these businesses
by this month's payday and furthermore
with only 1,000 business loans so far
agreed upon by banks through your
business loans game does this show that
thanks ironer B to loan out to
businesses and what what can the
government do to ensure that banks act
in the national interest at this time
well the Chancellor has already
announced the 330 billion pound package
to support businesses right the way
through to employees he will let set out
the further detail as necessary as soon
as practical and of course we do want to
encourage banks to be lending and
providing the liquidity particularly
that small and medium sized businesses
need so that is important and we do want
that message along with the support
we've given to small businesses and
banks to be conveyed as clearly as
possible and to be active you can
actually do to twist the arms of banks
to ensure they do act in this way well
the Treasury ministers are in regular
contact with the banks we're looking at
both what they need but also critically
how we get the finance to the businesses
which are viable but are just struggling
with the challenge of coronavirus and we
want to make sure particularly those
vulnerable small businesses and
medium-sized businesses can see their
way through this crisis and I know the
Chancellor and the Treasury team doing
everything they can to make sure that
that can be done thank you all very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder
UK forward slash news follow the story
for all the latest with BBC News